\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ../org-gtd.info
@settitle Org GTD User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright (C) 2018-2023 Aldric Giacomoni <trevoke@@gmail.com>

You can redistribute this document and/or modify it under the terms
of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

This document is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE@.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Org GTD: (org-gtd).   An opinionated GTD flow implemented in org-mode.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Org GTD User Manual
@subtitle for version 3.0
@author Aldric Giacomoni
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Org GTD User Manual

Org GTD is an attempt to implement the GTD flow described in the GTD
book as faithfully as possible.

@noindent
This manual is for Org GTD version 3.0
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Summary::                      quick intro to GTD
* What's new in 3.0: What's new in 30. 
* Setting up Org GTD::
* Using Org GTD::                How Org GTD maps to the GTD flow
* Troubleshooting::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

What's new in 3.0

* Minimum emacs version now 27.2: Minimum emacs version now 272. 
* Organize menu has changed::
* Easier to clarify more items::
* Functions exist to create your own hooks::
* Support habits::
* Todo keywords can be customized::
* Massive API changes::
* Massive Data structure changes::
* Include horizons::
* You can create your own project templates and insert them while clarifying::

Setting up Org GTD

* Upgrading::                    How to upgrade your local setup across major versions
* Installing::                   Get Org GTD in your emacs
* Configuring::                  Required and optional system configuration

Upgrading

* 3.0.0 <- 2.2.0: 300 <- 220. 
* 2.2.0 <- 2.1.0: 220 <- 210. 
* 2.1.0 <- 2.0.0: 210 <- 200. 
* 2.0.0 <- 1.1.x: 200 <- 11x. 


Installing

* use-package::
* Manually::


Configuring

* The easy way::
* Required configuration of sub-packages::
* configuration options for org-gtd::
* Recommended key bindings::
* Sample Doom Emacs Config::


Using Org GTD

* Org-mode building blocks for Org GTD::
* The GTD flow::
* Automating through emacs::

The GTD flow

* Adding things to the inbox::
* Processing the inbox::
* Clarifying each item::
* Organizing an item into the system::
* Engaging with your GTD items::
* Working with the GTD Horizons::
* Cleaning up / archiving completed work::
* Commands you can call on org-agenda::
* Defining your own agenda views::
* Adding your own hooks when organizing::


Troubleshooting

* Finding lost tasks::
* Projects without a NEXT item::
* I can't create a project when clarifying an inbox item!::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Summary
@chapter Summary

This package tries to replicate as closely as possible the GTD workflow (see diagram below).

This package, and this documentation, assume familiarity with the flow of GTD as described in the book.

This package provides a system that allows you to capture incoming things into an inbox, then process the inbox and categorize each item based on the GTD categories. It leverages org-agenda to show today's items as well as the NEXT items. It also has a simple project management system, which currently assumes all tasks in a project are sequential.
@example
                                    +-------+
                                    |"STUFF"|
                                    +---+---+
                                        |
                                    +---v---+
                                    | INBOX |
                                    +---+---+
                                        |              Eliminate  +-----------+
                                        |            +----------->|  Trash    |
                                 +------v------+     |            +-----------+
                                 | What is it? |     |
                                 +------+------+     |            +-----------+
                                        |            | Incubate   |  Someday/ |
                                        |            +----------->|   Maybe   |
+----------+  YES (multi-step)   +------v------+  NO |            +-----------+
| Projects |<--------------------|    Is it    |-----+
+-+----^---+                     | Actionable? |     | File       +-----------+
  |    |   +----------------+    +------+------+     +----------->| Reference |
  |    |        Review for  |           |                         +-----------+
+-v----+---+     Actions    |           |
| Planning |                +---------->| YES
+----------+                            |
                                 +------v------+     Less than
                       Delegate  | What's the  |     2 minutes    +-----------+
                     +-----------+    NEXT     +----------------->|   DO IT   |
                     |           |   Action?   |                  +-----------+
                     |           +------+------+
                     |                  |
                     |                  | FOR ME:
                     |                  |         Specific Date or Time
                     |                  +-------------------------------+
                     |              ASAP|                               |
               +-----v-----+      +-----v-----+                   +-----v-----+
               |           |      |           |                   |           |
               |           |      |           |                   |           |
               |           |      |           |                   |           |
               |           |      |           |                   |           |
               |           |      |           |                   |           |
               +-----------+      +-----------+                   +-----------+
                Waiting For        Next Actions                      Calendar
@end example

@node What's new in 30
@chapter What's new in 3.0

@menu
* Minimum emacs version now 27.2: Minimum emacs version now 272. 
* Organize menu has changed::
* Easier to clarify more items::
* Functions exist to create your own hooks::
* Support habits::
* Todo keywords can be customized::
* Massive API changes::
* Massive Data structure changes::
* Include horizons::
* You can create your own project templates and insert them while clarifying::
@end menu

@node Minimum emacs version now 272
@section Minimum emacs version now 27.2

It became too difficult for me to support 27.1.

@node Organize menu has changed
@section Organize menu has changed

@itemize
@item
Habits have their place now (h)
@item
What used to be called "archive" is now called "knowledge" (k)
@item
Modify project is now "Add to project" (a)
@end itemize

@node Easier to clarify more items
@section Easier to clarify more items

There's now two more powerful commands you can use to clarify almost anything:
@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-clarify-item}
@item
@code{org-gtd-clarify-agenda-item}
@end itemize

These both allow you to enter a one-off clarify/organize flow.

@node Functions exist to create your own hooks
@section Functions exist to create your own hooks

Make GTD truly a part of your emacs experience!
These functions take various arguments (check the documentation in emacs) and automatically add something to your org-gtd. This would be useful after sending an email, for instance.
Please share your own hooks as issues in Github or in the discord so we can create a community library!
@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-habit-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-calendar-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-delegate-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-incubate-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-single-action-create}
@end itemize

@node Support habits
@section Support habits

Org mode's habits now have a specific place here.

@node Todo keywords can be customized
@section Todo keywords can be customized

@ref{Tell me all the levers I can pull, , See all the configuration options}

@node Massive API changes
@section Massive API changes

The package domain now is a better match for the domain language of GTD@.

Functions use the words @samp{capture}, @samp{process}, @samp{clarify}, @samp{organize}, @samp{review}.

@node Massive Data structure changes
@section Massive Data structure changes

@itemize
@item
SCHEDULED and DEADLINE are intended to be used for things that have to start and things that have to end, respectively. V2 abused them, v3 is more respectful of how org-mode wants to work.
@item
We use our own timestamp property. For compatibility with orgzly, we currently duplicate the timestamp into the body.
@end itemize

@node Include horizons
@section Include horizons

@itemize
@item
They can be displayed while clarifying
@item
There's an optional organize-hook for areas of focus
@item
There's an agenda view for areas of focus
@end itemize

@ref{Working with the GTD Horizons}.

@node You can create your own project templates and insert them while clarifying
@section You can create your own project templates and insert them while clarifying

@ref{Options and commands related to clarification}

@node Setting up Org GTD
@chapter Setting up Org GTD

@menu
* Upgrading::                    How to upgrade your local setup across major versions
* Installing::                   Get Org GTD in your emacs
* Configuring::                  Required and optional system configuration
@end menu

@node Upgrading
@section Upgrading

If you are installing and not upgrading, you can skip this section entirely and just go to the next section, @ref{Installing}.

@menu
* 3.0.0 <- 2.2.0: 300 <- 220. 
* 2.2.0 <- 2.1.0: 220 <- 210. 
* 2.1.0 <- 2.0.0: 210 <- 200. 
* 2.0.0 <- 1.1.x: 200 <- 11x. 
@end menu

@node 300 <- 220
@subsection 3.0.0 <- 2.2.0

There's a lot here, so you may want to make yourself some tea. We have to cover support for org habits, upgrading data, key changes in the configuration, a change in the menu, and the rest of the API changes. And once that's done, you should head back to the @ref{What's new in 30, , What's new in 3.0} section to see what else is available for you!

@itemize
@item
@anchor{A note for doom emacs users}A note for doom emacs users


Beta testers using doom emacs found they needed to do a fully clean install. The regular upgrades did not work. We could not find a clean fix. We suspect this is related to org-mode being a very complex beast, but we're not sure.

@item
@anchor{Support for org habits}Support for org habits


For the sake of keeping the @samp{org-agenda-custom-commands} as simple as possible, habits are now stored under headings with the property @code{ORG_GTD: Habits}. The same rules for refiling apply to these headings.

@item
@anchor{Upgrading data}Upgrading data


Some not-inconsequential data structure changes happened under the hood. To keep using @samp{org-gtd} you will need to upgrade your data, using @code{M-x org-gtd-upgrade-v2-to-v3}.
@emph{Backups are always recommended, even though there are tests.}
Note that if there are any habits managed by @samp{org-gtd v2} then they will be moved to a heading @code{* Habits}, in a file called @samp{org-gtd-tasks.org}, in @samp{org-gtd-directory}.

@item
@anchor{Key changes in configuration}Key changes in configuration


Here's a table of the changes, with sample config change and explanations afterwards.
@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem 2.0
@tab 3.0
@item @code{org-gtd-process-mode}
@tab @code{org-gtd-clarify-mode}
@item @code{org-gtd-process-map}
@tab @code{org-gtd-clarify-map}
@item @code{org-gtd-choose}
@tab @code{org-gtd-organize}
@item @code{org-gtd-process-item-hooks}
@tab @code{org-gtd-organize-hooks}
@item @code{org-gtd-capture-templates}
@tab Now looks like @code{org-capture-templates}
@item Projects :TRIGGER:
@tab changed again (see below)
@item @code{org-gtd-agenda-custom-config}
@tab gone (see below)
@item org file headers
@tab Drop 'em (see below)
@end multitable

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Sample new config}Sample new config


@lisp
(use-package org-gtd
  :after org
  :quelpa (org-gtd :fetcher github :repo "trevoke/org-gtd.el"
                   :commit "3.0.0" :upgrade t)
  :demand t
  :custom
  (org-gtd-directory "~/org-gtd")
  (org-edna-use-inheritance t)
  (org-gtd-organize-hooks '(org-gtd-set-area-of-focus org-set-tags-command))
  :config
  (org-edna-mode)
  :bind
  (("C-c d c" . org-gtd-capture)
   ("C-c d e" . org-gtd-engage)
   ("C-c d p" . org-gtd-process-inbox)
   :map org-gtd-clarify-map
   ("C-c c" . org-gtd-organize)))
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Projects trigger}Projects trigger


The new trigger line looks like this:

@code{:TRIGGER: org-gtd-next-project-action org-gtd-update-project-task!}

This allows us to define these functions as flexibly as we want, in the future, and
that will mean we can expand what it means to be a project in the future.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-capture-templates}}@code{org-gtd-capture-templates}


Most of you users have not had to touch this, so you probably won't have a use for this section of the upgrade documentation.
The new data structure is now a complete parallel for the @code{org-capture-templates} structure, so you can see how to structure it by looking at the help file for that.

The key elements are still the same, however:
@itemize
@item
the template has to start with a single asterisk
@item
the entry has to be @code{entry  (file ,#'org-gtd-inbox-path)}
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-agenda-custom-config}}@code{org-gtd-agenda-custom-config}


This customization is no longer in use. It wasn't an easy decision to make, but I have to make way for bigger, future changes in org-gtd over the next major releases.

If you have an existing @code{org-gtd-agenda-custom-commands} setup, then you can do something like this to keep using it. In short, for now, create your own function, and wrap the definition with the @code{with-org-gtd-context} macro. You can see the source code of @code{org-gtd-engage} for an example.

@lisp
; only so I refer to it with a name in this snippet
(setq my-commands org-gtd-agenda-custom commands)

(defun my-org-gtd-engage ()
  (interactive)
  (with-org-gtd-context
      (let ((org-agenda-custom-commands my-commands))
        ; "g" is what the previous command used, replace with what you need
        (org-agenda nil "g"))))
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Dropping the org file headers}Dropping the org file headers


The TODO keywords are now customizable (see @code{M-x customize-group org-gtd RET}), while they were hard-coded in v2. Those hard-coded values are now the defaults, but you should remove the hard-coded values anyway, so remove the following line:

@samp{#+TODO: NEXT(n) TODO(t) WAIT(w@@) | DONE(d) CNCL(c@@)}
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{A change in the menu}A change in the menu


@itemize
@item
Habits have their place (@samp{h})
@item
What used to be called "archive" is now called "knowledge" (@samp{k})
@item
Modify project is now "Add to project" (@samp{a})
@end itemize

Do note that that "a" got completely reassigned! If you used to use it for items that went into your personal knowledge management system, you'll need to retrain yourself.

I'm very sorry about this. In the future, you'll be able to customize this UI@.

@item
@anchor{Rest of API changes}Rest of API changes


@itemize
@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-delegate} is now @code{org-gtd-delegate-item-at-point}}@code{org-gtd-delegate} is now @code{org-gtd-delegate-item-at-point}


This is the function to call if you want to delegate without refiling.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-agenda-projectify} is now @code{just org-gtd-clarify-agenda-item}}@code{org-gtd-agenda-projectify} is now @code{just org-gtd-clarify-agenda-item}


V3 means you can freely clarify and organize anything in the agenda with the above function.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-agenda-delegate} is now @code{org-gtd-delegate-agenda-item}}@code{org-gtd-agenda-delegate} is now @code{org-gtd-delegate-agenda-item}


The nomenclature changes here because of an effort to, over time, define a better language for GTD, slicing vertically through org-mode features.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-cancel-project} is now @code{org-gtd-project-cancel}}@code{org-gtd-cancel-project} is now @code{org-gtd-project-cancel}


Same reason as above.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-agenda-cancel-project} is now @code{org-gtd-project-cancel-from-agenda}}@code{org-gtd-agenda-cancel-project} is now @code{org-gtd-project-cancel-from-agenda}


Same reason as above.

@item
@anchor{@code{org-gtd-show-stuck-projects} is now @code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-projects}}@code{org-gtd-show-stuck-projects} is now @code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-projects}


Same reason as above.
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{That's it!}That's it!


Go check out @ref{What's new in 30, , What's new in 3.0} as well as @ref{Configuring}.
@end itemize

@node 220 <- 210
@subsection 2.2.0 <- 2.1.0

@itemize
@item
@anchor{respect org-mode's org-reverse-note-order variable}respect org-mode's org-reverse-note-order variable


The upgrade to @samp{2.0.1} allowed addition of a task as the first task of an existing project while organizing a clarified item.
@samp{2.0.2} allows the user to choose what they prefer. Correspondingly, it lets the @samp{org-mode} variable @code{org-reverse-note-order} operate as it should. In your configuration, use:
@lisp
(setq org-reverse-note-order t)   ;; refile to the top of the list, or
(setq org-reverse-note-order nil) ;; refile to the bottom of the list
@end lisp

Note that if you're upgrading directly from 2.0.0 you still need to make the adjustment to the TRIGGER for your project headings.
@end itemize

@node 210 <- 200
@subsection 2.1.0 <- 2.0.0

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Update org-edna trigger}Update org-edna trigger


In order for project modification to work, you will need to go to every Project heading that you have. You will find the following:
@example
:PROPERTIES:
:TRIGGER: next-sibling todo!(NEXT)
:ORG_GTD: Projects
:END:
@end example

And you will need to update the trigger so it looks like this:
@example
:PROPERTIES:
:TRIGGER: relatives(forward-no-wrap todo-only 1 no-sort) todo!(NEXT)
:ORG_GTD: Projects
:END:
@end example

Now be sure to set the following variable in your config file, before org-gtd loads, to disable the loud warning:

@lisp
(setq org-gtd-update-ack "2.1.0")
@end lisp

That is it! You're ready to add tasks to existing projects while processing the inbox.
@end itemize

@node 200 <- 11x
@subsection 2.0.0 <- 1.1.x

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Configuration}Configuration


Org GTD now handles dependency loading more intelligently, so you no longer need the overly complicated setup of @code{org-gtd}, @code{org-agenda} and @code{org-capure} in your config for dependency loading. You now only need @code{org-gtd}. If you are using @code{use-package} then the following is the minimal config required.

@lisp
(use-package org-gtd :after 'org)
@end lisp

You no longer need to configure @code{org-agenda-property-list} yourself. Org GTD now manages the context with a macro, @code{with-org-gtd-context}. Any prior configuration of this subpackage can be handled as you did before.

You no longer need to configure @code{org-agenda-files}. Same reason as above. This allows you to use org-gtd without destroying your previous setup, and makes it easier to try org-gtd and then get rid of it if you don't like it.

You no longer need to configure @code{org-agenda-custom-commands}. Now there's @code{org-gtd-agenda-custom-commands} to take the relay - see the variable documentation for more information.

The org-capture templates are now simplified and managed by @code{org-gtd-capture-templates}. If you did not change the default configuration, then you can just remove what you had. Read the variable documentaton for further information.

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Example upgrade}Example upgrade


My org-gtd config for 1.x was as follows:
@lisp
(use-package org-gtd
  :after org
  :quelpa (org-gtd :fetcher github :repo "trevoke/org-gtd.el"
                   :commit "1.1.1" :upgrade t)
  :demand t
  :custom
  (org-gtd-directory "~/org-gtd")
  (org-agenda-property-list '("DELEGATED_TO"))
  (org-edna-use-inheritance t)
  :config
  (org-edna-load)
  :bind
  (("C-c d c" . org-gtd-capture)
   ("C-c d a" . org-agenda-list)
   ("C-c d p" . org-gtd-process-inbox)
   ("C-c d n" . org-gtd-show-all-next)
   ("C-c d s" . org-gtd-show-stuck-projects)
   :map org-gtd-process-map
   ("C-c c" . org-gtd-choose)))


(use-package org-agenda
  :ensure nil
  :no-require t
  :after (org-gtd)
  :custom
  (org-agenda-skip-deadline-if-done t)
  (org-agenda-skip-scheduled-if-done t)
  (org-agenda-files `(,org-gtd-directory))
  (org-agenda-custom-commands '(("g" "Scheduled today and all NEXT items" ((agenda "" ((org-agenda-span 1))) (todo "NEXT"))))))

(use-package org-capture
  :ensure nil
  :after org-gtd
  :config
  (setq org-capture-templates `(("i" "Inbox"
                               entry (file ,(org-gtd--path org-gtd-inbox-file-basename))
                               "* %?\n%U\n\n  %i"
                               :kill-buffer t)
                              ("t" "Todo with link"
                               entry (file ,(org-gtd--path org-gtd-inbox-file-basename))
                               "* %?\n%U\n\n  %i\n  %a"
                               :kill-buffer t))))
@end lisp

And my config for 2.0 is:
@lisp
(use-package org-gtd
  :after org
  :quelpa (org-gtd :fetcher github :repo "trevoke/org-gtd.el"
                   :commit "2.0.0" :upgrade t)
  :demand t
  :custom
  (org-gtd-directory "~/org-gtd")
  (org-edna-use-inheritance t)
  :config
  (org-edna-mode)
  :bind
  (("C-c d c" . org-gtd-capture)
   ("C-c d e" . org-gtd-engage)
   ("C-c d p" . org-gtd-process-inbox)
   ("C-c d n" . org-gtd-show-all-next)
   ("C-c d s" . org-gtd-show-stuck-projects)
   :map org-gtd-process-map
   ("C-c c" . org-gtd-choose)))
@end lisp
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{Relevant commands with new names}Relevant commands with new names


@itemize
@item
@code{org-agenda-list} -> @code{org-gtd-engage}
@item
@code{org-gtd-clarify-finalize} -> @code{org-gtd-choose} (see the section on Key bindings below)
@end itemize

@item
@anchor{heading states (TODO etc)}heading states (TODO, etc.)


You need to rename CANCELED to CNCL@. a simple string replace in the @code{org-gtd-directory} will do the trick.

@item
@anchor{Differentiating GTD types of items}Differentiating GTD types of items


Org GTD no longer uses the name of the heading to figure out how to refile things, and which headings are useful. Instead it uses a custom Org property called ORG_GTD. This means you are free to rename the existing headings whatever you want, but you DO need to make some adjustments to your current files.

If you would like to add new refile targets, it's simple, follow these instructions.

For projects, make sure the heading has the following two properties.
@example
:PROPERTIES:
:TRIGGER: next-sibling todo!(NEXT)
:ORG_GTD: Projects
:END:
@end example

For other headings, make sure there is an ORG_GTD property, like for the project, above.

The other ORG_GTD properties are set as follows. Note that Single and Delegated actions are together now, so you can merge those headings if you want.

@table @asis
@item Scheduled actions
@samp{ORG_GTD: Calendar}
@item Single & Delegated actions
@samp{ORG_GTD: Actions}
@item Incubated actions
@samp{ORG_GTD: Incubated}
@end table

For incubated actions, version 1.x of Org GTD asked for second-level heading, such as @code{*To Read}. No more - these are now top-level headings, exactly as described above, with a heading property of @code{ORG_GTD: Incubated}.

@item
@anchor{Multiple refile targets}Multiple refile targets


There is a new variable, @code{org-gtd-refile-to-any-target}. By default this variable is set to @code{t}. This means that Org GTD will refile to whatever the first target it finds is. This is the default value because it most closely matches the behavior for version 1.x.
@strong{THIS BEHAVIOR ALSO APPLIES TO INCUBATE REFILE TARGETS}. Therefore, if you have multiple incubated refile targets, you will need to set this variable to @code{nil}, or change to a single refile target. You can e.g. set a custom property to describe the kind of incubated item it is, if it is useful to you, something like:

@example
* Incubated
** Buy a boat
SCHEDULED: <2035-06-01 Fri>
:PROPERTIES:
:INCUBATE: big financial investment
:END:
@end example

@item
@anchor{Key bindings}Key bindings


Version 1.x of Org GTD recommended a binding for @code{org-gtd-clarify-finalize}. This binding must now be set as follows (replace the keybinding with one of your choice):

@lisp
(define-key org-gtd-process-map (kbd "C-c c") #'org-gtd-choose)
@end lisp
@end itemize

@node Installing
@section Installing

This package requires emacs 27.2 or higher.

This package is on MELPA and MELPA stable under the name @code{org-gtd}.

@menu
* use-package::
* Manually::
@end menu

@node use-package
@subsection use-package

Just make sure this is loaded after @code{org-mode} like so.
@lisp
(use-package org-gtd :after org)
@end lisp

@node Manually
@subsection Manually

Check out the source code for dependencies and install them.
Then, clone this repo to a directory of your choice, e.g. @samp{~/.emacs.d/packages}.
Finally, add this to your config:
@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/.emacs.d/packages")
(require 'org-gtd)
@end lisp

@node Configuring
@section Configuring

@menu
* The easy way::
* Required configuration of sub-packages::
* configuration options for org-gtd::
* Recommended key bindings::
* Sample Doom Emacs Config::
@end menu

@node The easy way
@subsection The easy way

Just turn on @code{org-gtd-mode} (@code{M-x org-gtd-mode}). This will set up emacs, Org mode, and Org GTD's dependencies. It will wrap a number of @code{org-agenda} functions to work smoothly. If you are just testing out Org GTD, this is a good way to start.

Turn off @code{org-gtd-mode} to restore emacs to pre-org-gtd settings.

Note, you should still head over to the @ref{Recommended key bindings} section.

@node Required configuration of sub-packages
@subsection Required configuration of sub-packages

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Configuring org-edna}Configuring org-edna


package: @uref{https://www.nongnu.org/org-edna-el/}

This is one of the dependencies. This setting change is REQUIRED@. It automatically changes the next TODO heading to NEXT in a project when you've finished the current task.

You do not need to make this change if you choose to toggle @code{org-gtd-mode}.
@lisp
(setq org-edna-use-inheritance t)
(org-edna-mode 1)
@end lisp
@end itemize

@node configuration options for org-gtd
@subsection configuration options for org-gtd

@itemize
@item
@anchor{I don't care just let me start using it}I don't care, just let me start using it


The most direct way to find out about the configuration options for org-gtd is to see the customize group: @code{M-x customize-group RET org-gtd}. They are all optional because they all come with default values.

The only one you may want to change before starting to use Org GTD is @code{org-gtd-directory}, which is the directory that Org GTD
will look to for everything it needs to do.

The configuration options will also be mentioned in the relevant subsections of @ref{Using Org GTD}.

@item
@anchor{Tell me all the levers I can pull}Tell me all the levers I can pull


Make sure you also read about sub-package configuration: @ref{Required configuration of sub-packages}.

@table @asis
@item @code{org-gtd-directory}
set this to a directory. @samp{org-gtd} will look for all its files in this directory.
@item @code{org-gtd-next}
Keyword to use for actions ready to be taken
@item @code{org-gtd-next-suffix}
org-mode keyword suffix (e.g. !, @@)
@item @code{org-gtd-todo}
Keyword to use for actions not yet ready
@item @code{org-gtd-todo-suffix}
org-mode keyword suffix (e.g. !, @@)
@item @code{org-gtd-wait}
Keyword to use for blocked actions (e.g. delegated)
@item @code{org-gtd-wait-suffix}
org-mode keyword suffix (e.g. !, @@)
@item @code{org-gtd-done}
Keyword to use for completed actions
@item @code{org-gtd-done-suffix}
org-mode keyword suffix (e.g. !, @@)
@item @code{org-gtd-canceled}
Keyword to use for actions that won't be done
@item @code{org-gtd-canceled-suffix}
org-mode keyword suffix (e.g. !, @@)
@item @code{org-gtd-capture-templates}
(!note: take care when changing this) This defines the pre-filled text that will show up when capturing an item to the inbox. The only requirements are that the template string must define an org-mode top-level heading, and that the entry point to the inbox.  That is to say, the first two characters must be a single asterisk followed by a space: @code{"* "}, and the entry type must be like this: @samp{entry  (file ,#'org-gtd-inbox-path)}. @ref{Adding things to the inbox}.
@item @code{org-reverse-note-order}
(@samp{org-mode} variable) set this to @code{t} to add new items to the top of project tasks and to @code{nil} to add new items to the bottom of project tasks when organizing an item as such.
@item @code{org-gtd-organize-hooks}
this is a list of functions that you can use to decorate each item when you clarify it. For instance, you could add a function to set the effort, or the priority, or some category, etc. By default it has only one function, which lets you add tags, but of course you can change this entirely. @ref{Organizing an item into the system, , Organizing an item}.
@item @code{org-gtd-archive-location}
Points to a function to generate the archive file dynamically. Default value generates a file suffixed with the current year. The function has an arity of zero and generates an org-mode file+outline path. @ref{Cleaning up / archiving completed work}.
@item @code{org-gtd-refile-to-any-target}
when @code{t}, @samp{org-gtd} will refile to the first target it finds, and create a target if it doesn't find one. When false, it will ask for confirmation before refiling. @ref{Refiling to the appropriate area}.
@item @code{org-gtd-delegate-read-func}
function that is used to prompt for a person a task is delegated to. Must return a string. By default this is set to @code{read-string}.
@item @code{org-gtd-areas-of-focus}
list of strings representing your areas of focus (horizon 2 in GTD).
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-show-horizons}
When clarifying, do you want the horizons buffer to be shown by default, or do you prefer it hidden?
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-project-templates}
Alist of strings: @code{project template name . project template} where there template is a series of tasks you may want to insert automatically, if you have a generic type of project that comes up a lot.
@item @code{org-gtd-horizons-file}
Name of the file, in @code{org-gtd-directory}, that will be displayed when the horizons buffer is displayed when clarifying.
@end table
@end itemize

@node Recommended key bindings
@subsection Recommended key bindings

There's an important keymap you'll want to make the flow of processing the inbox smoother. To limit impact on your emacs configuration, there is a specific keymap you can use. The function you'll want to bind is @code{org-gtd-organize}. I suggest @code{C-c c}, as in the following example.

@lisp
(define-key org-gtd-clarify-map (kbd "C-c c") #'org-gtd-organize)
@end lisp

For other keybindings, do what you need. My bindings use @code{C-c d} as a prefix, i.e.:

@table @asis
@item @code{C-c d c}
@code{org-gtd-capture}
@item @code{C-c d e}
@code{org-gtd-engage}
@end table

etc.

@node Sample Doom Emacs Config
@subsection Sample Doom Emacs Config

If you are a Doom Emacs user, then your configuration may look something like this:

@lisp
(use-package! org-gtd
  :after org
  :config
  (setq org-edna-use-inheritance t)
  (org-edna-mode)
  (map! :leader
        (:prefix ("d" . "org-gtd")
         :desc "Capture"        "c"  #'org-gtd-capture
         :desc "Engage"         "e"  #'org-gtd-engage
         :desc "Process inbox"  "p"  #'org-gtd-process-inbox
         :desc "Show all next"  "n"  #'org-gtd-show-all-next
         :desc "Stuck projects" "s"  #'org-gtd-reflect-stuck-projects))
  (map! :map org-gtd-clarify-map
        :desc "Organize this item" "C-c c" #'org-gtd-organize))
@end lisp

@node Using Org GTD
@chapter Using Org GTD

@menu
* Org-mode building blocks for Org GTD::
* The GTD flow::
* Automating through emacs::
@end menu

@node Org-mode building blocks for Org GTD
@section Org-mode building blocks for Org GTD

This section introduces how Org GTD leverages org-mode.

Org Gtd uses @code{org-edna} to automatically trigger state changes in projects, such that when you mark a NEXT item from a project as DONE, the next TODO in that project automatically becomes NEXT, such that the agenda is always up-to-date (you may need to refresh the agenda).

Org GTD uses org keywords to figure out the relevant state of each task. By default, @code{NEXT}, @code{TODO}, @code{WAIT}, @code{CNCL}, and @code{DONE}, though you can configure them.

Org GTD uses the following properties:
@table @asis
@item @code{ORG_GTD}
top-level property, used for simple filtering when it comes to agenda views
@item @code{ORG_GTD_TIMESTAMP}
where the timestamp for appointments and other date-relevant actions is stored. It's separate from everything else org-mode related in order to allow you, the user, to use @code{SCHEDULED}, @code{DEADLINE}, or even plain timestamps as you see fit.
@item @code{DELEGATED_TO}
used by a dependency, @code{org-agenda-property}, to show the name of the person to whom the task is delegated in the agenda view.
@end table

@node The GTD flow
@section The GTD flow

Here are the domain elements of GTD that we handle:

@menu
* Adding things to the inbox::
* Processing the inbox::
* Clarifying each item::
* Organizing an item into the system::
* Engaging with your GTD items::
* Working with the GTD Horizons::
* Cleaning up / archiving completed work::
* Commands you can call on org-agenda::
* Defining your own agenda views::
* Adding your own hooks when organizing::
@end menu

@node Adding things to the inbox
@subsection Adding things to the inbox

The trip through GTD arguably begins by adding things to the inbox. The inbox is a file called @code{inbox.org} in the directory stored in the variable @code{org-gtd-directory}. By default this means the file will be @code{~/gtd/inbox.org}.

Org GTD provides one function to capture items: @code{M-x org-gtd-capture}. In my setup I have this bound globally as such:

@lisp
(global-set-key "C-c d c" #'org-gtd-capture)
@end lisp

This function uses the variable @code{org-gtd-capture-templates} to define org-gtd-specific capture templates. By default it comes with two templates, one to just capture a new item, and one to capture an item with a link to the file where you were when you started the capture.

You can customize these templates as you see fit. In order to maintain proper functioning of org-gtd, however, there are two constraints:

@enumerate
@item
the first two characters of the template string must be a single asterisk followed by a space: @code{"* "}
@item
the entry type must be like this: @samp{entry  (file ,#'org-gtd-inbox-path)}
@end enumerate

@node Processing the inbox
@subsection Processing the inbox

Processing the inbox means taking everything in the inbox, one at a time, and refining/categorizing them so they are instantly useful when you are looking at available next / scheduled actions.

You can start processing the inbox with @code{org-gtd-process-inbox}. This starts a looping behavior of clarifying each item in the inbox.

@node Clarifying each item
@subsection Clarifying each item

Clarifying an item means editing and adding the information that will be most valuable to you to the item. Note that task-specific information, such as appointment date, or name of person to whom it is delegated, or even area of focus, will be added during the Organize step, so don't worry about these yet.

@itemize
@item
@anchor{How to start clarifying}How to start clarifying


Besides ending up in here automatically while processing the inbox, there's two more ways to enter the clarifying flow:

@table @asis
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-item}
call this from any org-mode heading to do a one-off clarification.
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-agenda-item}
call this from the agenda view, if you have anything you want to re-clarify, or possibly clarify for the first time, from somewhere outside the inbox.
@end table

@item
@anchor{data shape requirements}data shape requirements


There's two general shapes you'll be looking for.
Almost everything will look like a simple org-mode heading.
For instance, @code{* Task desc}.


The only exception will be a project, that will look like a top-level heading for the project description with, underneath, a series of second-level headings representing each task to be executed sequentially before the project is complete.

@example
* Project heading
** First task
** Second task
** Third task
@end example

@item
@anchor{Options and commands related to clarification}Options and commands related to clarification


The clarify buffers are @code{org-mode} buffers that use the minor mode @code{org-gtd-clarify-mode}. There is a keymap, @code{org-gtd-clarify-map}, that you can use to bind useful

While clarifying, you may find it useful to see your GTD horizons. You can use:
@table @asis
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-toggle-horizons-window}
a function that toggles the display of the horizons buffer
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-show-horizons}
a boolean variable defining whether the horizons window should be shown (t) or hidden (nil) by default when clarifying an item. See  @ref{Working with the GTD Horizons} for more details.
@end table

If you are clarifying a project, you may be interested in project templates:
@table @asis
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-project-insert-template}
a function that will ask you to choose a template to insert.
@item @code{org-gtd-clarify-project-templates}
an alist of the form @samp{(name . template)} where both name and template are strings. @samp{name} will be used in the interactive menu, and @samp{template} will be inserted in the buffer.
@end table
@end itemize

@node Organizing an item into the system
@subsection Organizing an item into the system

When you are done clarifying, call @code{M-x org-gtd-organize} (or hit your keybinding for it, see @ref{Recommended key bindings}). This will open a transient menu to let you choose how Org GTD should categorize this item.

Organizing is broken up into three steps:
@itemize
@item
Choosing a task type
@item
Applying hooks to add additional relevant information
@item
Refiling to the appropriate area
@end itemize

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Choosing a task type}Choosing a task type


Here are the following task types you can choose.

@table @asis
@item *[P]rojects
This is a multi-step action. In Org GTD, this is defined as a top-level org heading with a set of second-level org headings. Those second-level headings represent the sequentially-ordered set of tasks to be executed before the project can be called complete.
@item *[A]dd to existing project
Add current task to pre-existing project. See @code{org-reverse-note-order} to choose a default position (first or last) for this new task. You can always adjust this yourself later, then put your point on the project heading and call @code{org-gtd-projects-fix-todo-keywords-for-project-at-point} to have Org GTD clean it up for you.
@item @strong{[C]alendar}
Single action to be done at a given date or time. Org GTD will ask you for a date/time for this appointment.
@item *[D]elegate
Let someone else do this. Org GTD will ask you for a name to whom to delegate to and a date/time when to check up on the task with that person. You can customize @code{org-gtd-delegate-read-func} to specify a custom name input function (e.g. for completion purposes).
@item @strong{[S]ingle action}
This is a one-off to be done when possible.
@item @strong{[H]abit}
org-mode-style habit. Org GTD will ask you for a valid org-mode repeating stamp and a date when to start the habit tracking. See the org-mode documentation for more information.
@item @strong{[I]ncubate}
no action now; review later. Org GTD will ask you for a date at which it should remind you about this.
@item *[Q]uick action
Less than 2 minutes. Do it now, then choose this to mark the item as DONΕ and archive it.
@item @strong{[K]nowledge}
This is knowledge to be stored away. Choose this @strong{after} you have properly saved this item as knowledge.
@item @strong{[T]rash}
Not actionable; not knowledge. Discard this item.
@end table

@item
@anchor{Applying hooks}Applying hooks


The decorations (priority, tags, categories, etc.) are customizable as you desire and managed by @code{org-gtd-organize-hooks}, a list of functions. You can add your own functions to this list, as long as the functions do not modify the text in any "custom" way, separate from what org-mode understands.

See @ref{Adding your own hooks when organizing} for more details on how you can add your own or customize this further.

@item
@anchor{Refiling to the appropriate area}Refiling to the appropriate area


By default, org-gtd will refile to a single file in the directory, but you can create your own headings if you find it helpful.

If you would like to add new refile targets, it's simple, follow these instructions.

@itemize
@item
@anchor{New project heading}New project heading


Add a top-level heading in any @code{.org} file (including a new one) in @code{org-gtd-directory} and make sure its property drawer matches the one in the constant @code{org-gtd-projects-template}.

@item
@anchor{Other headings}Other headings


Create a new top-level heading in any @code{.org} file (including a new one) in @code{org-gtd-directory} and make sure its property drawer matches the one in the relevant template constant:

@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-habit-template}
@item
@code{org-gtd-calendar-template}
@item
@code{org-gtd-incubate-template}
@item
@code{org-gtd-action-template}
@end itemize

Here is an example:

@example
:PROPERTIES:
:ORG_GTD: Action
:END:
@end example
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Engaging with your GTD items
@subsection Engaging with your GTD items

You can see a list of all NEXT actions, and scheduled actions, with @code{M-x org-gtd-engage} .

You can call @code{org-gtd-show-all-next} to only see NEXT actions, nothing scheduled.

You can use @code{org-gtd-oops} to see all the appointments you missed, and act on them accordingly.

The weekly review is not yet implemented.

@node Working with the GTD Horizons
@subsection Working with the GTD Horizons

In GTD, the horizons are defined as such:

@table @asis
@item Ground
the day-to-day
@item Horizon 1
projects
@item Horizon 2
areas of focus
@item Horizon 3
1-2 year goals
@item Horizon 4
3-5 year vision
@item Horizon 5
purpose and principles
@end table

Obviously, Ground and Horizons 1 are handled by the "capture/clarify/organize/engage" flow we've already seen.

GTD recommends that you do not start using the horizons above Horizon 1 until you have both Ground and Horizon 1 under control. So, when you are ready@dots{}

@itemize
@item
@anchor{Areas of focus}Areas of focus


Horizon 2 is now handled by a variable and a hook you can add to @code{org-gtd-organize-hooks}:
@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-areas-of-focus} is a list of strings, each representing one of your areas of focus.
@item
@code{org-gtd-set-area-of-focus} is the hook you would add, e.g. @code{(setq org-gtd-organize-hooks '(org-gtd-set-area-of-focus))}, it ensures each item you clarify will need to be part of a horizon.
@end itemize

You can then use the function @code{org-gtd-reflect-area-of-focus} to generate an agenda view to review a specific area of focus.

In order to add areas of focus to pre-existing items in your system, without going through the clarifying flow, we provide two functions:
@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-area-of-focus-set-on-item-at-point}, when you are on a org heading
@item
@code{org-gtd-area-of-focus-set-on-agenda-item}, when you are on an agenda item
@end itemize

Do note that calling the function on item at point will trust you blindly to do the right thing, whereas setting the area of focus through the agenda will attempt to recognize if you are on a project task and thus set the category on the project itself instead of the task.

@item
@anchor{Longer-term horizons}Longer-term horizons


The longer-term horizons can be stored in a file in the @code{org-gtd-directory}. A variable governs the name of the file, @code{org-gtd-horizons-file}, by default @samp{horizons.org}.

At the moment it does not seem particularly useful to add any automation around these, since they will change so infrequently.

They are, however, useful to display.

A variable, @code{org-gtd-clarify-show-horizons}, determines whether/where to display the side buffer while clarifying.

Regardless of the value of this variable, you can use the function @code{org-gtd-clarify-toggle-horizons-window} to display or hide the side window. If the above variable is nil, then the horizons window will be toggled on the right side of the screen.
@end itemize

@node Cleaning up / archiving completed work
@subsection Cleaning up / archiving completed work

Doing this without user intervention is tricky, as it makes undoing actions more complicated. As such, Org GTD provides a function that will go through the @code{org-gtd-directory} files, find the headings that belong to Org GTD (see @ref{Refiling to the appropriate area}), and archive the finished items.

The variable @code{org-gtd-archive-location} points to a @strong{function} that returns a string matching the @code{org-archive-location} definition. It is a function in order to allow the filename to be dynamic.

The function to archive everything is @code{M-x org-gtd-archive-completed-items}.

@node Commands you can call on org-agenda
@subsection Commands you can call on org-agenda

Since Org provides the agenda, it is a convenient base of operations for interacting with things that come up through @code{org-gtd-engage}.

Here are the actions available to you:

@table @asis
@item @code{M-x org-gtd-delegate-agenda-item}
When the point is on an action, this will properly delegate the action to someone else.
@item @code{M-x org-gtd-project-cancel-from-agenda}
When the point is on a project action, this command will cancel the remaining actions in the project.
@item @code{M-x org-gtd-clarify-agenda-item}
If you would like to clarify and organize an item through the agenda view, for whatever reason, this is your entry point.
@end table

@node Defining your own agenda views
@subsection Defining your own agenda views

You can define your own agenda views by defining your own functions like shown below, where @samp{x} is whatever your defined key is.

@lisp
(defun my-agenda ()
  (with-org-gtd-context
      (let ((org-agenda-custom-commands '(your-definition-here)))
        (org-agenda nil "x"))))
@end lisp

@node Adding your own hooks when organizing
@subsection Adding your own hooks when organizing

Adding useful metadata to the tasks allows you to enhance the agenda view to make it more useful to you, whether it be effort, tags, priority, or any other amount of information you might like.

This being said, different types of tasks or items are not even created equal. For instance, there may be metadata you want to add to a project heading but not its tasks, or to a calendar item and not to a trash item.

Org GTD therefore provides a helper function, @code{org-gtd-organize-type-member-p}, which you can use when creating your own hooks. The function takes one argument, a list of types (provided in the function's documentation).
When called as part of a hook, this function will check a buffer-local variable called @code{org-gtd--organize-type}, managed by Org GTD, to determine truthiness.

For an example, see the source code for @code{org-gtd-areas-of-focus--set}, which will not run if the task being organized is a project task, trash, knowledge, or a quick action.

@node Automating through emacs
@section Automating through emacs

There's now a few functions you can use when you are doing work within emacs and would like GTD to track something for you as a result:
@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-habit-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-calendar-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-delegate-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-incubate-create}
@item
@code{org-gtd-single-action-create}
@end itemize

See the documentation for each, but suffice it to say they all take, at the very least, a string that will be used as the text part of the org heading that gets stored in org-gtd.

For instance, one way this could work:

@lisp
(defun org-gtd-email-reminder ()
  (let ((topic (message-fetch-field "subject"))
        (delegated-to (message-fetch-field "to"))
        (reminder-date (org-read-date nil nil "+3d")))
    (org-gtd-delegate-create (format "Reminder: %s" topic)
                             delegated-to
                             reminder-date)))

(add-hook 'message-send-hook 'org-gtd-email-reminder)
@end lisp

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@menu
* Finding lost tasks::
* Projects without a NEXT item::
* I can't create a project when clarifying an inbox item!::
@end menu

@node Finding lost tasks
@section Finding lost tasks

Sometimes things break. The following functions will help you find these items:

@itemize
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-calendar-items}
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-incubated-items}
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-habit-items}
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-delegated-items}
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-single-action-items}
@item
@code{org-gtd-reflect-stuck-projects}
@end itemize

@node Projects without a NEXT item
@section Projects without a NEXT item

@code{org-edna} needs to be configured and enabled, see @ref{Configuring org-edna}.

To fix such a stuck project, put the point on the project heading and call @code{M-x org-gtd-projects-fix-todo-keywords-for-project-at-point}.

@node I can't create a project when clarifying an inbox item!
@section I can't create a project when clarifying an inbox item!

See @ref{data shape requirements}. If this does not help you, please open an issue and show exactly what you have done before asking @samp{org-gtd} to create a project.

@bye